If you have a bit of a Bible to Matthew chapter two, verse 16 to 18,
you'll encounter one of the most notorious stories in any religion,
suspicious of a prophecy about a new king hared, the great tricks,
the ma into telling him where baby Jesus was born.
Then he sends his soldiers to massacre every child under the age of two in
Betham. It's a of shocking cruelty.
One that has ensure that king herd's name is still synonymous with evil
even to this day.
But what if we told you there was more to her's story born in Southern Palestine
in 73,
BC herd was a man at the center of events that has shaped history.
He was there when Rome was transformed from a Republic to an empire,
he consulted with Julius Caesar. He befriended Mark Anthony,
and he submitted to the rule of Augustus as king of Juda.
He rebuilt the second temple,
saved the Olympic games from bankruptcy and to protect Jewish power across the
world. Yes, he died an unloved tyrant hated by his people,
his name forever stains with the blood of the innocence.
This in the video today is the story of how one great man became
the tyrant of all history.
When hero was born in 73 BC,
it was a great time to be from a Jewish family,
roughly a hundred years before a group of priests known as the Macabees had
rebelled against the saluted empire and turned Jerusalem into an independent
city state. For the first time in a long time,
the Jews were beholden to no one that no one included the superpower of the era.
And that was of course the mighty Roman Republic with whose blessing Juda kept
its independence. But unfortunately for her,
his family's Jewish roots weren't as clear cut as he might have liked the son of
a wealthy ambitious man known as Anter herds was by birth part ed
part Arab. Although his father's family had been practicing Jews for a century,
they were still seen as outsiders in Judea,
a stigma that kept the family from holding any power. But her's dad.
Anti was nothing, if not ambitious.
And there was no way that he was going to let his murky origins halt his
family's rise. The year,
her turned six and titer got his chance in 67 BC Alexandra
solo, the queen of Judea died.
Unfortunately she died without leaving a clear line of succession and her two
sons, they elected to take their claims, the battlefield.
And so it began the first of a series of war that are going to rack Judea
for the rest of this video on one side was the Queen's son.
Her Canus II on the other was her can's brother Aris, Dubus, spoiler alert.
You only need to remember the, her Ranka guy as the organ underway.
Her anus came to her's dad to beg for his support and ti agreed,
but not because he thought hi anus was in the right,
in their short meeting at titer realized just how weak and easy to manipulate hi
anus was sounds well,
what could be better than having a weak manipulable king on the throne?
When he owes you a favor by 63 BC, the war was moving decisive,
inherent favored in the temple.
Ariss was fast running out of options faced with the imminent collapse of his
claim to the throne.
Ariss decided to roll everything on one crazy gamble.
At the time that Roman general Poe was riding around the Eastern Mediterranean
conquering. Well just about everything sight.
So Ariss bang the general a massive bribe to invade Juda on his
behalf. This well, it would turn out to be a rather hilariously bad move.
When word arrived, Pompe moved his army on Jerusalem.
Then he assessed the situation and came to the conclusion that ABUS was going to
lose and pocketed ABUS and sided with Harus.
In order to finally to defeat him amusing as this might be,
it was also a major historical turning point in the wake of is' defeat,
Pompe annex,
large parts of the once independent Jue the then installed the victorious Hiran
on the throne as a Roman client king us like that.
The era of an independent Jewish state, it came to a close in its place,
began an era of Jerusalem under the heel of Rome.
Not everyone was upset by this though for Herod's dad.
I Poe's intervention was like winning the lottery with Harran II in charge.
IIB began happily cooperating with the new Roman authorities and establishing
himself as the real power behind the throne.
Not the population of Juda made this easy in 57 BC,
an an Roman uprising,
forced Angus and Anter to call the Roman army back in order to save
their butts.
This time was Mark Anthony that answered the call like Pompe before in Mark
Anthony subdued Jerusalem, with these in the aftermath over the campaign,
he was introduced to inhibitors now 16 year old son,
despite being 10 years older than herd Mark Anthony hit it off with a boy.
Pretty soon they were firm friends.
It was a friendship that would soon make her the most powerful man in Juda.
There's a peculiar curse that afflicts small states on the doorsteps of
superpowers.
Each time the winds of change ripple through the corridors of power,
the smaller state has to hunker down in case everything it holds.
Dear is simply blown away in Rome in 53 BC while a
hurricane, it was a brewing years.
The Republic had been under the sway of something called the first triumvirate.
It's a collection of three great men,
all hoping to one day become the undisputed rule. The first was Pompe,
the old benefactor of Amita and Hiran us. The second,
the second was a man known as crass. The third,
well that was Julius Caesar in may 53,
BC crass died ending the first tra with third part of their trio gone.
It could only be so long before Cesar ends Pompe turned on one another in
January 49 BC. Well,
they did the civil war that ripped its way through the Roman Republic smashed
apart old certainties everywhere in Jua,
a presumably panicked anti Renzi Ranas were forced to choose who to throw their
support behind Pompe. The man who had given them power or Caesar,
the man mark an now fought for in the ends went for Caesar.
It could have been a catastrophe.
The first step along a long path attended with victorious Pompe,
having antis entire family crucified.
Instead though it became the making of them on August the ninth, 48,
BC Caesar annihilated Poe's army. Uh,
the battle of falis broken Pompe ran only to be assassinated later that year
in the aftermath.
You better believe all jewelry did not forget who his friends were in 47
BC.
I was rewarded for ditching Pompe by being made pro curator or
financial governor of Juda. Not only that,
but he was given Roman citizenship something.
He was able to pass on his son and IDI.
He had big plans for his new citizen son, bad, same yep.
40 BC.
And tippe pulled some strings and had the 26 year old her made governor of
Galilee.
This was the first time the ancient world got a good look at the sort of ruler
that her would be the results. Well,
they were as shocking as you might be expecting as the governor of Galilee
her's first task was to take care of some partisans who were hiding and caves,
trying to overthrow the re backed state and calling themselves new Macabees.
Everyone expected herd to wage a conventional war. Instead,
the new governor located the cave system,
the rebels were hiding in sentence soldiers with the orders to massacre
everyone. It was a day of bloodshed,
so great that it triggered riots in Jerusalem.
Her was hauled before the religious authorities and threatened with death for
his actions, but herd stood his ground before the highest priests of Judaism.
He asserted his right as governor to deal with rebels. As he saw fit,
including wholesale murder,
despite his brutality herd was let off free escaping the death
penalty.
It was the first major scandal that he was implicated in that it certainly
wouldn't be the last,
If the people of Jude were hoping that the days of political shockwaves from
Rome, battering them senseless were over well events,
Sue improved otherwise just three years after one civil war propelled her and
anti titer to the top.
Another came along that threatens to destroy them on March the 15th 44
BC Julius Caesar was assassinated in Rome by Brutus and Cassius that
Deone the two traders fled to the east of the Republic back in the eternal city,
mark Anza and Caesars nephew,
Octa declared a new war in order to exterminate the assassins.
Unfortunately for Judea, this meant once again,
being caught right in the middle of things from his new power base in the east,
Cassius ordered all ovens is to pay for his war against mark Ansy and Octavian.
That meant Juda coughing up 15,000 kilograms of silver or
its inhabitants being put to the sword as prorated. The job of collecting money.
Well, that fell to anti's possible to read.
Anti's willingness to cooperate with Cassius is a way of protecting her buts.
Given what we know about anti's opportunism,
it's just as easy you imagine that it fit his loyalties. Once again,
like a weasel playing BOS and the people of Juda,
they certainly saw it as the latter in 43 BC, one of anti's own tax collectors.
He assassinated him when her got news that his father had been killed.
He flew in into a rage with permission from Cassius as forces.
He tracked down the assassin and murdered him.
It could easily have been herd's last ever active violence in 42
BC, mark,
Anthony and Octavian now formed into the second Trium alongside Marcus Amelia's
lapis defeated Cassius and Brutus with the war over mark,
an went warrior to avenging angel riding across the provinces that had supported
Cassius and leaving death and destruction in his wake.
This should have been bad news for her.
He was suddenly stuck with explaining why I had leaped in due bed with Cassius,
but her had apparently picked up a trick or two from his old man.
He told the avenging angel one, the course daddy had to support.
Cassius he'd have destroyed G dare if he didn't. But I mean, honestly, bro,
we always wanted you to win. You know that right? You were always our guy,
how true this was debatable, but Mark Anthony,
he trusted his old friendship with her just enough to buy it rather than kill.
He made her Tera of Galilee it's ruler and he also made her's brother
Tera of Jerusalem.
Suddenly Harran is II was reduced to a figurehead real power in Juda.
Now lay in the hands of anti's sons.
This turned out to be a pretty hard sell for Judas population.
Remember her's family was seen as not really J Jewish,
but rather fake Jews who got into bed with the hated Romans.
So when some dudes called the IANS suddenly attacked in 40 BC,
most Jews decided to side with them. Amid fighting.
He ranks II was put in chains,
had his ear sliced off and was dragged away to captivity in battle on her's
brother,
the Tetra of Jerusalem committed suicide than face the same fate over the three
rulers of jute. Only her escaped as the paren rampage,
he ran to the only safe place he could think of Rome in the eternal
city. Heroed was forced to beg the second Traver for help.
Mark Anton and Octavia. They listened and they finally agreed on one condition.
Herd would have to prove himself worthy by retaking Jerusalem.
For the next three years,
herd led a Roman army against the Pathan Papa government ruling Juda,
the bitters of civil war.
It claims many lives and it ruins herd's reputation further among the Jewish
part population,
but it worked in 37 BC Jerusalem fell and hero road into the city
aged just 36 hero had done. It had taken back.
What was his improved himself worthy to his Roman clients?
That same year he had his highest on a yet bestowed upon him no longer would
hero me be Tero of Galilee ruling alongside another te Akins figurehead like
Angus. Rather from this point on, there would only be one title buffeting,
a warrior like her. He would be a king of Judea
Her's.
First few years on the throne was spent trying to desperately apply Avene of
legitimacy to his rule. This meant divorcing his first wife,
banishing her from court and remarrying,
a woman named Marianne who just happened to be a princess from an old ruling
dynasty.
It also meant begging the now defeated paths to send Harus thei back
from Babylon. This might seem like an odd choice.
Harus was the only other guy around with a legitimate do hers throne.
Unfortunately for hero though, the captured king was still popular in G day.
So herd arranged to have Harran brought back and treated with the utmost respect
on the unspoken condition that Harran go arounds being all like, you know, gee,
this, her guy super great king, right? We should probably do what this guy says,
right guys, right with this done hers.
He went about winning over the popule over the next five years,
he built massive new city walls for Jerusalem and a brand new Citadel to protect
the temple named Anir B Mark Anthony. Naturally,
he even had mented showing himself alongside traditional Jewish objects just to
hammer home. The points that he really really was Jewish king,
but as we've already seen time and a gay in this video,
the fate of Juda, rulers, it was not decided in Juda,
but rather off in Rome and Rome,
it was gearing up for yet another civil war in 33 BC.
The second triumvirate went to the way of the first Trivers and onerously
collapsed to years after that 31 BC Y Dian a mark.
He decided to fight each other to the death for hers.
This was the first time that he found himself caught between two Roman factions
without Anter around.
This was a problem because her lacked anti wily political instincts,
while his father had been happy to chuckled allies like Pompe and Caesar,
when he thought the winds were lying against them,
her was just a bit loyal to his friends as the armies of
octane. And Anthony gathered hared through his lot in with Anthony.
And you can probably guess at this point where this is going on September the
second 31,
BC octane demolished Anthony's forces at the battle of a Anthony was forced to
flee into hiding where he, Claire,
Patrick committed suicide at the same very time as summons landed on her's desk,
calling him to roads to explain himself to Octa. Now,
if you've ever that to go before your boss, after making some colossal mistake,
you may have the faintest inkling of what her was feeling on that long and
lonely Boatright like when he had to explain anti's actions to Mark Anthony Hert
had no friendship with Octavia that he could fall back on worse as a guy who had
literally named citadels after Anthony herd was intimately connected to
Octavia's enemy.
Perhaps it says something of herd's state of minds that his last act before
leaving Juda was to execute. Harrans. I second, that way,
if hero was executed in turn, at least the throne would stay in his family,
but it turns out hero really could be as Wiley Asita.
Once in Rhodes hero didn't even bother trying to lie.
He boldly told Octavia that he had supported mark Antony to the death that had
been loyal to the general or for decades and would remain loyal even now Orian
listened. And when her was done, presumably he gave him a rise. Smile.
The for saying that herd's loyalty was a far more useful asset to Rome than
someone who had trying and worm their way out of trouble.
He then reconfirmed her as the king of ju dare is pretty hard to imagine what
would've been going through. Hero's mind on that boat, right home. I mean,
against all odds, his truth telling gamble,
it had absolutely paid off Octavian might not exactly trust him,
but he certainly respected him at least.
And in Octavia's good books was exactly where the king of Judea wanted
to be.
Some three years after the meeting in Rhode Octavian finally completed his
takeover of him in Republic. He took the name that history today knows him by,
and that is Augustus.
After half a century of bloodshed Rome transformation into an empire,
it was finally complete
With the drum of the Empire's creation. Out of the way,
hero was able to finally settle into actually ruling Juda between
27 and 20 BC.
He built up an image of himself as a sort of pagan Jewish ruler. One,
he hoped would appeal to both Judas population and also his re backers.
Plus if neither side was ever really convinced by herd's posing,
they couldn't ignore his real achievements.
As king of Juda hero spent his time building new staff like Bob,
the builder on cocaine, Jerusalem. He got a new Amit, a market raw palace,
and a ton of new homes to replace those that were destroyed by an earthquake new
AUCs brought fresh water into the city on the fringes of Judea,
huge new fortres were being built to protect the kingdom.
Some of these such as Masada are still extinct and impressive.
Then there was the money spent abroad shoring up Judas image,
iconic cities like Damascus and Beru were given her sponsored makeovers.
When the Olympic games was gonna go bankrupt herd in and he saved it.
This launch was accompanied by an unmistakable increase in Juda,
power Augustus, twice visited her in Jerusalem.
And each time he handed over Newland to the king in 20 BC,
Judea had expanded to include swaths of modern Syria,
Lebanon and Jordan as Judas prestige grew in Rome took notice
soon Jerusalem was flooded with Roman playwrights, historians and philosophers,
all eager to see the booming city state.
And you better believe hero tried to use this power for good.
He was a vocal defender of Jews living in other states,
often going out of his way to appease their Gentile hosts. But of course,
this is still heroed.
We're talking about here underneath all of this glitz and glamor lurk,
a dark side on the streets.
Ordinary Duan were suffering enormous tax burdens to pay for her's projects.
On top of that,
there were uneasy questions hovering over her's Jewishness with his fondness for
pagan,
Roman things many believed in Jerusalem that that ruler was secretly trying to
sabotaged their culture.
Not that it was all bad for ordinary men and women though,
during the horrific famine of 25 to 24 BC,
it was herd's Roman contact that stopped the disaster by arranging huge
shipments of grain to ju dare.
But it wasn't until 20 BC that heroed made his greatest attempt to win Jewish
hearts.
He decided to bills the second temple way back in 519
BC,
the Neo Babylonians had destroyed the first temple a replacement had been bills,
but it was definitely let's say modest under hers.
That was about to change though.
Everything you think of when you think of Jerusalem's temple was a result of
hers, construction spree, the sweeping walls,
vast towers and great yard covering the temple mouse all came into being because
of Hart, the famous Western wall. You can see standing today. Yep.
That's another her project.
Not that there's grand's new temple modified everyone.
Hart kitted out with too many.
Roman touches too many architectural nods to Judas Imperial LORs,
nor did he take criticism kindly when a small sector of radical Jews tore down a
Roman Eagle symbol from the new temple, her had them all burned alive.
Still that's her entered the last decade of his life in 14 BC,
the signs were all there that he might go down in history as not so bad.
A ruler. Indeed. He might even have lived up to his billing of herd. The great,
but you and I both know that there is one final act to come.
One of the fascinating things about hero is that despite still being a household
name 2000 years later,
he often feels like he was only ever a bit player in two major stories for most
of his life. The story Herod appeared in was the epic novel,
the rise of the Roman empire. But as he ended old age,
the king of Juda found himself cast as the villain in an even more famous tale.
That's right. It's about time that we talked about Jesus.
There's a bit of a debate about when Christ's birthday actually was with it.
Generally being agreed that it's somewhere from six BC to four BC,
whichever is true by the time Christ was born.
Hero's rule was in a very bad place.
The trouble had really started in 10 BC when hero had waged war against the
naans.
And so screwed up the campaign that had fallen from or Augustus faith that this
sudden demoted status seems to have triggered a crisis of paranoia in the king
convinced supporters of the dead he ranks II were plotting in the shadows hero,
began a ruthless campaign to root out suspected enemies.
He had already put his wife Maryam near to death,
but now he also had her brother, mother, grandfather,
and children all killed her,
even had two of his own sons and titer and Arista Bulu executed.
When Augustus hurt,
he joked it would be safer to be her's pet pig than one of his sons,
nor were those outside of her's court. Safe. In his last years,
her had hundreds of ordinary Judas thrown in Dungeons and tortured.
He masterminded gruesome public executions to keep order rumors started the
swell that had defiled,
the tombs of David and Solomon that had taken nine wives,
defiance of Jewish customs.
Although there were still TRAs such as the opening of herd's great new port city
CRE in nine BC,
but they were all overshadowed by a cloud of paranoia that was hanging over to
dare it.
Wasn't held by a horrific illness that the king contract is that eight aways
flesh, which is thought day to be EZ gang green.
The disease left her so mad that he gave insane orders from the mass execution
of 300 soldiers to a demands that Al GDE and Nobles be dragged to an
amphitheater on his death and then shot full of arrows.
It was against this dark background that AEC of Jewish scholars suddenly
announced the time of the Messiah was almost upon them.
And so we come to her's most infamous legacy.
Matthew chapter two verse 16 to 18 tells us that hared became worried about
the prophesized Messiah.
Eventually ordering every child under two in Behem to be put to death
known as the massacre of the innocence,
the killing his controversial among historians,
because it only appears in Matthew's gospel.
The other gospels don't mention it nor to the accounts of Josephus or Nicholas
of Damascus.
Still from what we know of hero's mental state in his last few years,
having a bunch of random babies killed would certainly have been completely in
character. Thankfully,
the massacre would be the last awful thing that the king of drew ever did
in four BC herd. The great finally passed away in Jericho.
This was only a handful of months after a failed suicide attempt. Traditionally,
its thought he died in March, although no one really knows for sure.
After his passing Augustus decree, Judea would be split into three parts.
The Kings that her had helped create, it was no more in the ends.
The life of her was defined less by who he was than by those who
were around him. The lives of Julius Caesar, Mark Anthony Augustus.
And of course, Jesus continue to fascinate us even now to millennia later,
to have been part of all their stories is a remarkable achievement in itself.
Even if her may not have seen it that way.
The poem Aussie mens by Percy Shelley tells us of a traveler who finds a great
broken statue of some king in the middle of a desert. Now the statue's pedestal.
It declares look on my works. You mighty and despair.
There is nothing left of this dead. King's deeds, no hints of his life.
Just endless sand in the desert of history.
It's tempting to think the same has come of hero with his name still only
just about visible, thanks to a single verse in a single book of the Bible.
But as this video has hopefully shown,
there was more to the life of her than one horrific act.
He may not have been a good man or even a particularly clever man, but herd.
The great was certainly one thing.
He was a man worth remembering. So I really hope you found that video.
Interesting. If you did, please do give us a thumbs up alone.
Don't forget a subscribe. We do brand new videos, just like this four times a.
So subscribe that bell,
do all of that other great stuff and I'll see you next time.